Why Rust (#12)
0atman/noboilerplate: scripts/13-why-rust.md

# Extern Crates

```rust

```

# Imports

```rust
use std::collections::BTreeMap;
```

# Setup

```rust
fn main() {
	type Dependency = String;
	println!("Rust is boring");

```

%%

![[rust-logo.png]]

# Rust is Boring

### Why Rust?

notes:

Hi friends my name is Tris and this is No Boilerplate, focusing on fast, technical videos.

Today I hope to show you that Rust is ready for use in your company, in production, NOW.

Not only that, but if you're not using Rust, you're missing out on a sea-change in how we build software.

---

### Crate Definition From crates.io

```rust
struct Crate {
    name: String,
    vers: String,
    deps: Vec<Dependency>,
    cksum: String,
    features: BTreeMap<String, Vec<String>>,
    features2: Option<BTreeMap<String, Vec<String>>>,
    yanked: Option<bool>,
    links: Option<String>,
    v: Option<u32>
}
```

notes:

Rust's package registry is called Crates.io.

When running a package registry you have the problem 

---

# Some Stats

- Rust can legally drive a car
- crates.io has ~100k packages
- First-class support on AWS, Azure, GCP
- Most-used wasm language
- Most-loved language since 1.0 (7 years)

(stackoverflow developer survey)

notes:

> Rust is 16 years old now, has more packages than npm did in 2012, has first-class support on all enterprise clouds, and in-browser with wasm for 5 years.

Reviewer: How old was npm in 2012, to put things into perspective?

It has been the most loved language according to the largest developer survey on the planet for 7 years, that's every single year since 1.0.

---

![[jack-rust-perfect.png]]

<https://twitter.com/jack/status/1474263588651126788>

notes:

Why does everyone love Rust?

This is Jack Dorsey, who built twitter.

---

![[failwhale.png]]

notes:

Twitter started out using Ruby on Rails, then switched to a scala backend and microservices.

Jack didn't build twitter with C or C++. He's a web developer.

---

> If you almost never add anything, you get C.
> If you almost never remove anything, you get C++.

&mdash;Raffi Molero

notes:

I don't quite agree that rust is a PERFECT language, there are many features that I want in Rust, and every 6 weeks I get them, thanks to the incredible core team.

I don't think Rust is perfect, I think that Rust can allow you to write perfect code.

---

<split even>

<ul>
<li>Correctness focus</li>
<li>Algebraic data types</li>
<li>Compile-time execution</li>

> <li>Built-in transpiler metaprogramming</li>

Reviewer: Why "transpiler" metaprogramming specifically? Isn't it just metaprogramming?

Author: It's to be VERY clear to people who don't understand what macros are: Python and Ruby have metaprogramming, but not 'transpiler' - I'm hoping people understand that this means arbitrary syntax transformation

Reviewer: 🤔 fair

Rust isn't trendy, it's boring.

---

# Here Be Kraken

notes:

You know what isn't boring? seafaring in the ancient Mediterranean.

If you were a sailor or at merchant, you would understand that you would lose ships to the sea now and then.

So it was, so it had always been.

Most of the sea was unexplored, and there were monsters, no doubt, taking the ships.

Sailors accepted that these were just the risks that you had to accept to operate on the high seas.

---

# Here Be Overheads

notes:

You know what else isn't boring? SOFTWARE.

And I don't mean in a good way.

In our field in 2022, everyone accepts that there are some things you just have to deal with in order to write software.

---

# Lies Programmers Believe About Software

notes:

some lies programmers believe about software, include, but are not limited to:

- That software is built on unknowable layers of abstraction
- The layers can only do what you want if you recite the correct inscrutable incantations
- Scaling horizontally is the way to solve your problems
- Bugs must be caught in production.
- If you don't use yaml and javascript to solve your problems, you will have to use xml and java.

> - speed

Reviewer: I'm... not sure about those lies. I'm interested in what you've seen, because these seem a bit weird to me. Especially "bugs must be caught in production", that seems like something no software developer would believe no matter the experience...

Author: Agreed, I've changed it to "syntax is your enemy"

---

## I Am Tired of Accepting Things I Cannot Change

I am now changing things I cannot accept

notes:

I have been a web developer for 15 years, writing backends in python, ruby and node, and frontends in various javascript frameworks.

I am tired of writing bullshit that I can't guarantee.

and I'm not alone.

---

![[linus-easy-going.png]]

(with apologies to Linus)

notes:

Linus Torvalds is not an easy man to please.

As you probably know, Linus created and oversees the development of the Linux kernel.

He is a detail-oriented man who cares about reliability over all else.

And yet when Rust support was recently merged in to the Linux kernel, many veteran developers decried this step as bowing to a flashy, fashionable new language.

> The idea that Linus would approve of rust due to POPULARITY is laughable to those who know his reputation.

Reviewer: As well as those who have actually tried using Rust in a similar context, such as Asahi Lina who wrote her M1 Mac GPU driver in Rust and elaborated her very positive experience about it on Twitter.

Not sure if there's something you can add here, it's just that I thought that talking about his reputation wasn't concrete enough of an argument, albeit already very convincing :)

---

![[network diagram.png]]

notes:

And Linus is ABSOLUTELY RIGHT to be so conservative.

Nearly every computer used show you this video, from your wifi router, to the network systems in your school, company and isp, to google's global video distribution network, is running this kernel.

There are islands of mac devices. But Linux is the OCEAN.

> There are clouds of windows networks. But Linux is the SKY.

Reviewer: Oh my god I love this.

Author: Then you'll really love the song that inspired these lines https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9ZDAYg196x8

%% with apologies to Audioslave %%

---

![[linus-chill.png]]
notes:

We are not talking about your pet projects, or your companies production projects.

We're not even talking about real-time banking software and hospital systems.

We are talking about Linux.

Rust is not the first language to be tried as an alternative to C, to write the linux kernel.

C++ was proposed 25 years ago, but failed to meet Linus's extremely high standards

C++ is not good enough for the Linux kernel, but Rust is.

---

And Rust, despite being a better language to write the Linux kernel then C++ is also a fantastic web development language.

---

## 🚀 Rocket.rs

![[rocket-rs.png]]

notes:

> Rocket is one of a handful of stable feature-rich backend web development frameworks rocket has

Reviewer: "rocket has" at the end doesn't make sense? (maybe it's just leftover from modifications)

I suggest adding "for Rust" instead
```suggestion
Rocket is one of a handful of stable feature-rich backend web development frameworks for Rust.
```
